cmd-ref: document data:status command (#3812)
iterative/dvc.org: content/docs/command-reference/data/status.md

# data status

> Show changes in data tracked by DVC between the last commit, the dvcfiles and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Show changes in data tracked by DVC between the last Git commit, the dvcfiles and
```

> Show changes in data tracked by DVC between the last commit, the dvcfiles and
> the workspace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Show changes in data tracked by DVC between the last committed project
version (Git `HEAD`), its [metafiles] and the <abbr>workspace</abbr>.

[metafiles]: /doc/user-guide/project-structure/dvcyaml-files
```

Author: "last committed project version (Git `HEAD`)" is too verbose.

I think "the last Git commit" is enough. Also "its metafiles" is not clear, whose metafiles?

Author: Regarding `abbr`, it's in the description, we don't need to add it everywhere.

Reviewer 2: > Regarding abbr, it's in the description, we don't need to add it everywhere.

The existing pattern is to put it in the intro and then skip in the description but add it again every so many paragraphs or once per section.

Reviewer 2: Also, it was not in the description at the time, see https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/pull/3812#discussion_r936287875. And I never said we should "add it everywhere".

## Synopsis

```usage

> usage: dvc data status [-h] [-q | -v]

Reviewer 3: reminder: need to update syntax highlighters for this

Author: Took a long time for me to find out how to do this. :)

Reviewer 3: is it solved?

Author: yeah, it should be.

                       [--granular] [--unchanged]
                       [--untracked-files [{no,all}]]
                       [--json]
```

## Description

> Shows changes that have differences between the last commit (`HEAD`) and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shows changes that have differences between the last Git commit (`HEAD`) and
```

> Shows changes that have differences between the last Git commit (`HEAD`) and

Reviewer 3: This is the same as `Show changes in data tracked by DVC between the last Git commit, the metafiles
and the workspace.` ... It doesn't give any new information to my mind

Reviewer 3: I mean the whole paragraph. No need to artificially expand on the same stuff. Or put some meaningful intro that would be useful. E.g. we can describe high level one more time why Git status is not enough, etc ... (where does the need for this comes from at all)

> committed data specified in [metafiles](/doc/user-guide/project-structure)

Reviewer 3: `metafiles files` (let's remove `files`?)

files, uncommitted changes that have differences between that specified in the
metafiles and the <abbr>workspace</abbr>, and the changes that are not in the
cache but is specified in those metafiles.

> The first change shows what is already committed to dvc via `dvc add` or

Reviewer 3: minor/style: dvc -> DVC

> The first change shows what is already committed to dvc via `dvc add` or

Reviewer 3: "fist chang", "second change" ... change for me is a specific item (e.g. data.xml changed), not a section or a kind/type of changes. I think we need to change language here. If we include the table of different section this whole paragraph is not needed?

Author: Need to rethink here. I don't find tables any better.

Reviewer: I have no attachment to this, but in case it's helpful, here's the best I could do to quickly summarize:

The status is determined by comparing four different states:

1. Workspace data
2. Workspace dvcfiles
3. Git HEAD dvcfiles
4. Cache

* Untracked files: workspace data exists but is not tracked by DVC (no workspace dvcfiles) or Git.
* DVC uncommitted changes: the workspace data has changed from the workspace dvcfiles.
* DVC committed changes: the workspace dvcfiles have changed from the Git HEAD dvcfiles.
* DVC unchanged files: everything is up to date and matches between all states (actually it can show as both "unchanged" and "not in cache" right now 🤔 ).
* Not in cache: the workspace dvcfiles don't match any entry in the cache.

Reviewer: A less technical take on DVC committed vs uncommitted:

* DVC uncommitted changes: workspace has changes that have not been DVC-committed.
* DVC committed changes: workspace has changes that have been DVC-committed but differ from the Git HEAD.

Are the other states unclear?

Are we over-complicating with indexes, dvcfiles, tables, etc.?

Reviewer: > Are the other states unclear?
> 
> Are we over-complicating with indexes, dvcfiles, tables, etc.?

@shcheklein @jorgeorpinel Your feedback here would be great 🙏 , thank you!

Reviewer 3: I've done another review. To me it's not about complexity or adding any tables/indexes on top of what we have. At the end it should be reasonable (simple, easy to understand, quick value - think about what users will be looking for first there). Right now it's repetitive, it's either goes to abstract or way too simple + it overlaps. We need to rethink (I put a some suggestions) how do we approach the Description section in the first place there.

> The first change shows what is already committed to DVC via `dvc add` or

Reviewer 3: As I mentioned below in the `#Output` section ppl won't be able to understand this paragraph. It's too technical, it's trying to explain in some abstract terms and very technical terms quite complex things. I would get rid / combine the the output description (see also the comment below)

`dvc commit` or `dvc repro` but the metafiles are not committed to git yet. The
second change shows the new changes to the data that is not tracked by DVC yet
or what you could `dvc commit`. The third change shows the files that are
missing from the cache. Some of those could be pulled from the remote.

> Using `--untracked-files`, it'll show the files that are not being tracked by

Reviewer 3: Q: `git status` by default includes Untracked. Should we do the same? Is it a performance optimization?

Reviewer: No, I urged to leave untracked files off by default. Please see the discussion in https://github.com/iterative/dvc/pull/7943#issuecomment-1172604913 and let me know if you have concerns.

Author: > Is it a performance optimization?

It's no longer be, or will no longer be of performance concern.
We didn't have `--untracked-files=normal` support in dulwich so we had to use `--untracked-files=all`, so it'd be noisy and slow if you have too many untracked files.

But thanks to @dtrifiro's great work in pygit2, the `git.status()` is about 30x faster.
Plus, we now have `--untracked-files=normal` support in pygit2, which will be much faster even for a very large repository. So there's no performance issue now. See https://github.com/iterative/scmrepo/pull/118.

(I have been testing a repo with 150,000 untracked files from a dataset, and `--untracked-files=normal` takes ~20ms now)

Reviewer: @skshetry I thought we can't mix pygit2 and dulwich?

Author: @dberenbaum, as far as I can tell, it should not be a problem for `dvc data status` as it only does one single `status()` call (also `get_rev()`, but it is a very small utility).

It's only a problem when we are using different APIs that are reading and writing using different backends, eg: `exp run`/`exp show`, etc.

Reviewer: Thanks @skshetry! Opened https://github.com/iterative/dvc/issues/8061 to track it and for any further discussion.

Author: Resolving this discussion and let's discuss this on https://github.com/iterative/dvc/issues/8061.

DVC or Git.

By default, `dvc data status` shows changes in the level the file/directory is
being tracked in. With `--granular`, it will show changes in file-level.

> The `--unchanged` option will list all of the files that aren't listed in

Reviewer 4: > btw, `--unchanged` should be automatically converted into links, it is happening cc @yathomasi ?

It needs to be a full command to get linked `dvc data status --unchanged`.

> The `--unchanged` option will list all of the files that aren't listed in

Reviewer 3: thanks - created this https://github.com/iterative/gatsby-theme-iterative/issues/63

committed changes or uncommitted changes.

### Output

> The `dvc data status` displays changes in multiple categories such as:

Reviewer 3: I think we need a table with explanations for this. May be a diagram, not sure. But w/o any explanations it's very hard to understand what this command does.

Author: I am trying to avoid any table. Diagram may be abstract. I think we should try to put it in simple words what those changes are, and follow up with examples.

Reviewer 3: I like the simplicity, but I think we should then put an example right here in the description. Or at least be explicit - "to understand the meaning check the example". Example should cover all of them then (?) and should be easier to understand. I'm not sure it's easy to achieve with throwing at people an output from the project that they haven't seen and didn't touch any files in it.

Reviewer 3: Reading the whole description again. The section name is output, but there is a list with name, no example to see. And to be honest, in this form it doesn't give enough value to exist (I mean the Output section). It should just embedded into the second paragraph above. It describes the same in some abstract fashion (which makes it hard to read). I think it's better instead of the half of the text about and the whole this section show a simplified / schematic snippet with an output and explain sections briefly underneath it.

- _Not in cache_
- _DVC committed changes_
- _DVC uncommitted changes_
- _Untracked files_
- _DVC unchanged files_

The categories will only be displayed when there are changes related to those
categories.

> The _DVC committed changes_ and _DVC committed changes_ shows more detailed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _DVC committed changes_ and _DVC uncommitted changes_ shows more detailed
```

state the files are in: _added_, _modified_, and _deleted_.

## Options

> - `--granular` - Show granular, file-level information for the changes for

Reviewer 3: minor/style: Show -> show (consistency)

>   dvc-tracked directories. By default, DVC only shows the changes at the level

Reviewer 3: here and everywhere - review and use consistently DVC or dvc (here it should be DVC-tracked I think)

  where the data is being tracked at.

- `--untracked-files` - Show files that are not being tracked by DVC and Git.

>   This option can also take values: `no` and `all`. With `--untracked-files=no`,

Reviewer 3: Q: why do we need `no` as an option?

Author: We might make `normal` default in the future, so `no` will be through `--untracked-files=no`.

Reviewer 3: I still don't get it ... so, no stands for normal or for "don't show"? this is quite confusing ...

Author: - `no` stands for "don't show".
- `all` shows all untracked files recursively.
- `normal` only shows untracked directories (without recursing) and files.

Author: I'll leave it out for now, as `--untracked-files=all` and `--untracked-files` are same.

Reviewer 3: I see, so, `normal` doesn't exist and is not a default for now. It's fine, but it was not clear from the docs at all. May be we can even skip `no` for now in the docs, since it's not needed? And even skip `all` modifier also ...

  this change is not shown and is a default. `--untracked-files=all` or just
  `--untracked-files` will show untracked files.

- `--unchanged` - Show unchanged DVC-tracked files.

- `--json` - prints the command's output in easily parsable JSON format, instead
  of a human-readable output.

- `-h`, `--help` - prints the usage/help message, and exit.

- `-q`, `--quiet` - do not write anything to standard output.

- `-v`, `--verbose` - displays detailed tracing information.

## Examples

```dvc
$ dvc data status
Not in cache:
  (use "dvc pull <file>..." to update your local storage)
        data/data.xml

DVC committed changes:
  (git commit the corresponding dvc files to update the repo)
        modified: data/features/

DVC uncommitted changes:

>   (use "dvc commit <file>..." to track changes)

Reviewer: Should we update the message here to suggest `dvc destroy` to stop tracking the file?

Reviewer: Edit: I meant `dvc remove`.

Author: `dvc remove` might be more suitable in `DVC committed changes`, no?  It untracks the output instead of rolling back.

Reviewer: I was thinking if you do `rm model.pkl`, it will show as an uncommitted change in `deleted` status. You may want to also do `dvc remove model.pkl.dvc` to stop tracking the file.

Anyway, I think it's a bit hard to guess what to suggest here, and it's probably better left as is for now.

        deleted: model.pkl
(there are other changes not tracked by dvc, use "git status" to see)
```

This shows that the `data/data.xml` is missing from the cache, `data/features/`
a directory, has changes that are being tracked by DVC but is not git-committed
yet, and a file `model.pkl` has been deleted from the workspace. The
`data/features/` directory is modified, but there is no further details to what
changed inside. The `--granular` flag can provide more information on that.

## Example: Granular output

Following on from the above example, using `--granular` will show file-level
information for the changes:

```dvc

> $ dvc data status

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
$ dvc data status --granular
```

Not in cache:

>   (use "dvc pull <file>..." to update your local storage)

Reviewer 3: `local storage` - we don't use this term, it should be cache I guess + `pull` updates cache and workspace

Author: So WDYT of?
```suggestion
  (use "dvc pull <file>..." to update the cache and the workspace)
```

Author: We use `download` in `dvc pull`, so we could also write it simply as:
```suggestion
  (use "dvc pull <file>..." to download files)
```

Reviewer 3: yep, looks better

        data/data.xml

DVC committed changes:
  (git commit the corresponding dvc files to update the repo)
        added: data/features/foo

DVC uncommitted changes:

>   (use "dvc commit <file>..." to track changes)

Reviewer 3: <file> should be <path> probably

Author: Could you please elaborate? Not sure I understand.

        modified: data/data.xml

> (there are other changes not tracked by dvc, use "git status" to see)

Reviewer: Why are there different changes in the two examples? Not a big deal, but I think it will be easier if we show the same example with and without `--granular`.

Author: Thanks for noticing this. That’s what I intended to do, but looks like I did dvc pull in the middle (or did not notice a bug).

# data status

Show changes in the data tracked by DVC in the workspace.

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: dvc data status [-h] [-q | -v]
                       [--granular] [--unchanged]
                       [--untracked-files [{no,all}]]
                       [--json]
```

> ## Description

Author: I have rewritten the description as @shcheklein suggested. I have added a description and a small list to explain individual categories.

Also, I have thrown out the mention of `metafiles`, I think we can talk mostly in terms of files and changes here.

The `data status` command displays the state of the working directory and the

> committed changes with respect to the last Git commit (`HEAD`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
changes with respect to the last Git commit (`HEAD`).
```

Very minor suggestion (not a blocker) to get rid of "committed" unless it's absolutely needed. I think it's easy to overuse these words until they lose all meaning.

Author: I was trying to say that the first part, pertains to the "DVC uncommitted changes" and the next is related to the `"DVC committed changes".  But I think we could drop "committed" entirely.

> It shows you what the new changes have been committed to DVC, which haven't been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It shows you what new changes have been committed to DVC, which haven't been
```

committed, which files aren't being tracked by DVC and Git, and what files are
missing from the cache. It shows you what's been going on with `dvc add`,
`dvc commit` and `dvc repro` commands.

The `dvc data status` command only outputs information, it won't modify or
change anything in your working directory. It's a good practice to check the
state of your repository before doing `git commit` so that you don't
accidentally commit something you don't mean to.

An example output might look something like follows:

```dvc
$ dvc data status
Not in cache:
  (use "dvc pull <file>..." to download files)
        data/data.xml

DVC committed changes:
  (git commit the corresponding dvc files to update the repo)
        modified: data/features/

DVC uncommitted changes:
  (use "dvc commit <file>..." to track changes)
        deleted: model.pkl
(there are other changes not tracked by dvc, use "git status" to see)
```

As shown above, the `dvc data status` displays changes in multiple categories:

- _Not in cache_ indicates that the hash for files are recorded in `dvc.lock`
  and `.dvc` files but the corresponding cache files are missing.

> - _DVC committed changes_ indicates that there are changes that are committed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _DVC committed changes_ indicates that there are changes that are `dvc-commit`-ed
```

For clarity and consistency with the next paragraph.

Author: Too many kinds of commit 😢

  that differs with the last Git commit. There might be more detailed state on
  how each of those files changed: _added_, _modified_, and _deleted_.
- _DVC uncommitted changes_ indicates that there are changes in the working
  directory that are not `dvc commit`-ed yet. Same as _DVC committed changes_,
  there might be more detailed state on how each of those files changed.
- _Untracked files_ shows the files that are not being tracked by DVC and Git.
  This is disabled by default, unless [`--untracked-files`](#--untracked-files)
  is specified.
- _DVC Unchanged files_ shows the files that are not changed. This is not shown

>   by default, unless [`--unchanged`](#--unchanged) is specified.

Author: I would love to get rid of this and make them obvious. `git` for example never talks about these categories, they just assume maybe because `staged`/`unstaged` are a fundament concept in git.

Reviewer 3: yes, you are right in the intention. But I would argue that Git is very complex as a product. You need to spend hours before you understand staged / unstaged. Only after that I would agree that it can start making sense w/o any explanations. In our case we would have to invest tons of time into UG, write DVC book, etc, etc

> By default, `dvc data status` shows changes to tracked files and directories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, `dvc data status` shows changes down to the top level of each DVC `output`.
```

Not sure about this wording, but I'm not sure "changes to tracked files and directories" conveys any info about granularity.

Author: I reworded this a bit differently, let me know what you think. 
> By default, `dvc data status` does not show individual changes inside the
tracked directories, which can be enabled by [`--granular`](#--granular) option.

  where the data is being tracked at.

- `--untracked-files` - show files that are not being tracked by DVC and Git.

- `--unchanged` - show unchanged DVC-tracked files.

- `--json` - prints the command's output in easily parsable JSON format, instead
  of a human-readable output.

- `-h`, `--help` - prints the usage/help message, and exit.

- `-q`, `--quiet` - do not write anything to standard output.

- `-v`, `--verbose` - displays detailed tracing information.

## Examples

```dvc
$ dvc data status
Not in cache:
  (use "dvc pull <file>..." to download files)
        data/data.xml

DVC committed changes:
  (git commit the corresponding dvc files to update the repo)
        modified: data/features/

DVC uncommitted changes:
  (use "dvc commit <file>..." to track changes)
        deleted: model.pkl
(there are other changes not tracked by dvc, use "git status" to see)
```

This shows that the `data/data.xml` is missing from the cache, `data/features/`
a directory, has changes that are being tracked by DVC but is not git-committed
yet, and a file `model.pkl` has been deleted from the workspace. The
`data/features/` directory is modified, but there is no further details to what

> changed inside. The `--granular` option can provide more information on that.

Reviewer: IMO we can drop this example since it's already shown above, and I don't thin further explanation is needed.

Author: Let's keep it if you don't have strong opinion. The granular output follows from this example, it's easier if they are together.

# data status

Show changes in the data tracked by DVC in the workspace.

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: dvc data status [-h] [-q | -v]
                       [--granular] [--unchanged]
                       [--untracked-files [{no,all}]]
                       [--json]
```

## Description

The `data status` command displays the state of the working directory and the
changes with respect to the last Git commit (`HEAD`).

> It shows you what new changes have been committed to DVC, which haven't been

Reviewer 3: cache - make it abbr

> It shows you what new changes have been committed to DVC, which haven't been

Reviewer 3: I really like the way it's written now. Simple and with a human in mind.

> you what's been going on with [dvc add](https://dvc-org-dvc-data-status-smqvo1.herokuapp.com/doc/command-reference/add), [dvc commit](https://dvc-org-dvc-data-status-smqvo1.herokuapp.com/doc/command-reference/commit) and [dvc repro](https://dvc-org-dvc-data-status-smqvo1.herokuapp.com/doc/command-reference/repro) commands

here it goes a bit too informal. I understand what you are trying to say, but I feel an urge to rephrase it a bit. Tbh we can drop it probably and combine the sentence left with the first intro paragraph.

committed, which files aren't being tracked by DVC and Git, and what files are
missing from the cache. It shows you what's been going on with `dvc add`,
`dvc commit` and `dvc repro` commands.

The `dvc data status` command only outputs information, it won't modify or
change anything in your working directory. It's a good practice to check the

> state of your repository before doing `git commit` so that you don't

Reviewer 3: change to: `git commit` or `dvc commit`?

Author: `git commit` because there is no issue even with `dvc commit` unless you need to share it with others, you can re-commit it with dvc.

Reviewer 3: hmm, it's the same with Git - you can recommit

Author: No, you’d have to amend the commit or add another one on top (at which point it’s not a recommit, the history is there). In DVC, even if you re-commit, dvc won’t know older versions of commit if it was not preserved via `git commit`.

Author: So you could say that dvc or `dvc commit` is forgiving in these accidental cases.

Reviewer 3: that's fine @skshetry , not a strong opinion here ... it feels to me that status can be useful even before `dvc commit` (e.g. at least not to waste time, and / or make sure / see what is actually are getting to be saved, etc). Your call here.

Author: My intention was to say that it could be useful before sharing it via commit+push, but yeah, I do think we should generalize it.
It’s useful other times too. :)

accidentally commit something you don't mean to.

An example output might look something like follows:

```dvc
$ dvc data status
Not in cache:
  (use "dvc pull <file>..." to download files)
        data/data.xml

DVC committed changes:
  (git commit the corresponding dvc files to update the repo)
        modified: data/features/

DVC uncommitted changes:
  (use "dvc commit <file>..." to track changes)
        deleted: model.pkl
(there are other changes not tracked by dvc, use "git status" to see)
```

As shown above, the `dvc data status` displays changes in multiple categories:

> - _Not in cache_ indicates that the hash for files are recorded in `dvc.lock`

Reviewer 3: do we have unknown now as well?

Author: Unknown is a file-state, not a category. But good catch.

  and `.dvc` files but the corresponding cache files are missing.
- _DVC committed changes_ indicates that there are changes that are

>   `dvc-commit`-ed that differs with the last Git commit. There might be more

Reviewer 3: `dvc commit`-ed (consistency + auto linked)

  detailed state on how each of those files changed: _added_, _modified_, and
  _deleted_.
- _DVC uncommitted changes_ indicates that there are changes in the working
  directory that are not `dvc commit`-ed yet. Same as _DVC committed changes_,
  there might be more detailed state on how each of those files changed.
- _Untracked files_ shows the files that are not being tracked by DVC and Git.
  This is disabled by default, unless [`--untracked-files`](#--untracked-files)
  is specified.
- _DVC Unchanged files_ shows the files that are not changed. This is not shown
  by default, unless [`--unchanged`](#--unchanged) is specified.

> By default, `dvc data status` does not show individual changes inside the

Reviewer 3: I like this explanation better compared to the one below :)

`By default, DVC only shows the changes at the level where the data is being tracked at.` - is too complicated, implicit, etc

Author: yeah, but I felt that we have to explain `granular` in a straight way instead of coming from the opposite direction.

option.

## Options

- `--granular` - show granular, file-level information of the changes for
  DVC-tracked directories. By default, DVC only shows the changes at the level
  where the data is being tracked at.

- `--untracked-files` - show files that are not being tracked by DVC and Git.

- `--unchanged` - show unchanged DVC-tracked files.

- `--json` - prints the command's output in easily parsable JSON format, instead
  of a human-readable output.

- `-h`, `--help` - prints the usage/help message, and exit.

- `-q`, `--quiet` - do not write anything to standard output.

- `-v`, `--verbose` - displays detailed tracing information.

## Examples

```dvc
$ dvc data status
Not in cache:
  (use "dvc pull <file>..." to download files)
        data/data.xml

DVC committed changes:
  (git commit the corresponding dvc files to update the repo)
        modified: data/features/

DVC uncommitted changes:
  (use "dvc commit <file>..." to track changes)
        deleted: model.pkl
(there are other changes not tracked by dvc, use "git status" to see)
```

This shows that the `data/data.xml` is missing from the cache, `data/features/`

> a directory, has changes that are being tracked by DVC but is not git-committed

Reviewer 3: git -> Git

Author: I don't know if I like `Git-committed`.

# data status

> Show changes in the data tracked by DVC in the workspace.

Reviewer 3: I would even say "to the files and ..." (w/o data), go ahead create a PR with this

> Show changes in the data tracked by DVC in the workspace.

Reviewer 2: The DVC team expressed the interest in more feedback for a future iteration so I didn't start a PR myself as they own the cmd ref. Happy to get is started though: https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/pull/3924

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: dvc data status [-h] [-q | -v]
                       [--granular] [--unchanged]
                       [--untracked-files [{no,all}]]

>                        [--json]

Reviewer 3: doesn't look important to me

>                        [--json]

Reviewer 2: It's secondary yes. A best practice we started applying recently, see https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/pull/3345.

```

## Description

The `data status` command displays the state of the working directory and the
changes with respect to the last Git commit (`HEAD`). It shows you what new
changes have been committed to DVC, which haven't been committed, which files
aren't being tracked by DVC and Git, and what files are missing from the
<abbr>cache</abbr>.

The `dvc data status` command only outputs information, it won't modify or
change anything in your working directory. It's a good practice to check the
state of your repository before doing `dvc commit` or `git commit` so that you
don't accidentally commit something you don't mean to.

> An example output might look something like follows:

Reviewer 3: wha -> what

it was fine before I think, don't see a reason to change this

> An example output might look something like follows:

Reviewer 2: > reason to change this 

Minor but not cosmetic: Reduced from 3 paragraph Desc. intro to 1. (We want explanations in refs to stay short.) I also removed some sentences that aren't needed IMO. Applied some [other existing patterns](https://www.notion.so/iterative/Per-doc-section-WIP-18d60e175b6643d58a164bec30288490#a6ab5ba78b82450c8f52353317059d23) (e.g. don't mention the command name at the beginning so it's not repetitive later when you need it in other paragraphs).

> An example output might look something like follows:

Reviewer 3: Applying existing patterns is fine, everything else feels very cosmetic still + changes the meaning / original intention (which is fine, but we don't have strong enough reason to spend time reviewing this to my mind in this case and debate one more time about intentions in the text, benefits, etc, etc). Please, unless it's super important let's not do this - it takes a lot of time to review it.

> An example output might look something like follows:

Reviewer 2: Agreed. I'm making a point to spend time on these for now just to compile mayor existing practices ([example](https://www.notion.so/iterative/Per-doc-section-WIP-18d60e175b6643d58a164bec30288490)).

- _DVC committed changes_ indicates that there are changes that are
  `dvc-commit`-ed that differs with the last Git commit. There might be more
  detailed state on how each of those files changed: _added_, _modified_,
  _deleted_ and _unknown_.
- _DVC uncommitted changes_ indicates that there are changes in the working
  directory that are not `dvc commit`-ed yet. Same as _DVC committed changes_,
  there might be more detailed state on how each of those files changed.
- _Untracked files_ shows the files that are not being tracked by DVC and Git.
  This is disabled by default, unless [`--untracked-files`](#--untracked-files)
  is specified.
- _DVC Unchanged files_ shows the files that are not changed. This is not shown
  by default, unless [`--unchanged`](#--unchanged) is specified.

By default, `dvc data status` does not show individual changes inside the
tracked directories, which can be enabled with [`--granular`](#--granular)
option.

## Options

- `--granular` - show granular, file-level information of the changes for
  DVC-tracked directories. By default, `dvc data status` does not show
  individual changes for files inside the tracked directories.

> - `--untracked-files` - show files that are not being tracked by DVC and Git.

Reviewer 2: So if it's tracked by EITHER DVC **or** Git it will not be included here?

- `--unchanged` - show unchanged DVC-tracked files.

- `--json` - prints the command's output in easily parsable JSON format, instead
  of a human-readable output.

- `-h`, `--help` - prints the usage/help message, and exit.

- `-q`, `--quiet` - do not write anything to standard output.

- `-v`, `--verbose` - displays detailed tracing information.

> ## Examples
> 
> ```dvc
> $ dvc data status
> Not in cache:
>   (use "dvc fetch <file>..." to download files)
>         data/data.xml
> 
> DVC committed changes:
>   (git commit the corresponding dvc files to update the repo)
>         modified: data/features/
> 
> DVC uncommitted changes:
>   (use "dvc commit <file>..." to track changes)
>   (use "dvc checkout <file>..." to discard changes)
>         deleted: model.pkl
> (there are other changes not tracked by dvc, use "git status" to see)
> ```
> 
> This shows that the `data/data.xml` is missing from the cache, `data/features/`
> a directory, has changes that are being tracked by DVC but is not Git committed
> yet, and a file `model.pkl` has been deleted from the workspace. The
> `data/features/` directory is modified, but there is no further details to what
> changed inside. The `--granular` option can provide more information on that.

Reviewer 2: I'd remove this one since it's already been used in the description.

```suggestion
```
